template versus custom design
which is best for your website
[Music]
hey i'm sam dunning co-owner over at
webchoiceuk.com
and host the top 100 marketing podcast
business growth show if you haven't yet
check out our weekly email where we
share actual marketing tips useful
podcasts free guides bonus resources
much much more each and every monday
start your week off with a bang sign up
today over at business growth dot email
so
templates or custom design for your
website which one's gonna be best well
i'm gonna break down the pros
and the cons so you can make a balanced
decision on which route to go down for
the web design on your business so first
up a template website design and build a
template could be built on many
different platforms you could look at a
wordpress themes such as divi elementor
or there's hundreds of others you could
look at something even more simplified
like squarespace or wix these website
builders where you don't necessarily
need a company or a freelancer to help
you you can literally just drag and drop
your website and build it yourself now
the advantages to a template or a theme
based approach for your website is
they're typically much cheaper compared
to a custom or bespoke design because
like i say you can do a drag and drop
builder and build it yourself or get a
freelancer or a company to help you and
it tends to be a lot faster to build
therefore a lot cheaper
now
what you need to consider
is that with a template design and build
they are much faster to build so they're
great for a cash strapped or
bootstrapped startup that needs
something up quickly online that's
perhaps going to share what you do how
you can help then point people to get in
touch however your design might look
quite generic it might look quite
similar to many other companies websites
so it won't have so much of a unique
look and feel
some template-based sites as well are
limited in terms of what you can do from
an seo perspective in terms of what you
can manage with the content or the
technical side of the website if you
need to make specific content seo
updates to help your google ranking you
might be somewhat limited and they tend
to be more of a short-term solution
because you lack things like the ability
to run a b tests on some templates not
all so what i mean by that is if you're
running ads if you're doing a lot of seo
if you're driving a lot of traffic to
the site you might want to test
different landing pages you might want
to test different messages different
call to action types and all that good
stuff so templates tend to be a great
fast route to market
but if you're looking for a longer term
solution you might want to consider a
custom design approach now on the other
end of the spectrum looking at a custom
design so a custom design typically
means you can have a unique bespoke look
and feel for all the key designs of your
project you might even do a mobile
design and then a desktop design for
your site so you might have unique
designs for your home page about us
pricing
contact maybe you've got a resources
section with blogs podcasts and all that
good stuff so you've got something
that's unique to your brand your look
and feel however that means the timeline
is going to take longer to design and
build the site because you've got
bespoke designs and therefore the
investment the pricing is typically
higher so you typically pay a freelance
or an agency a fair bit more than you
would to go down the template route but
with that comes a fair few advantages as
well as the unique look and feel you can
also build the website for seo from the
ground up in terms of the content in
terms of the technical structure getting
your metadata heading tags
image alt tags all that good stuff into
play but also it gives you a lot of
flexibility long term in terms of the
back end management so you might be able
to control each and every piece of
content and feature on your website you
might have the facility for many
integrations with crm systems apis and
all that good stuff and also you'll
probably have the flexibility to do a
lot of testing so if you're running a
lot of ads doing seo driving a lot of
traffic to your site from social and
different sources you can probably run
different a b and split tests so you can
test out different landing pages to see
how they convert tweak your call to
actions maybe you've got get a strategy
call or book a quote or request a
console and you want to tweak and change
see which converts the best test out
different areas of social proof
testimonials case studies and all these
different things that you can tinker
with on your custom site to see which
converts the most visitors into leads so
a custom design tends to be more of a
long-term solution because you're
building from the ground up to have
exactly what your company needs to
essentially make a lead generation
machine or a website that's going to act
as your best sales rep and grow your
business for the long term and you can
also take an emphasis on speed
so with template sites or theme based
sites over time they can slow down so
the actual page speed gets quite slow
which can put people off affect your
bounce rate so the people that go onto
your homepage and bounce off onto
another site so custom design you can
really take an emphasis on a fast
loading site to give people the content
the experience they want right away and
therefore improve those all important
conversion rates so what platform should
you pick for your website as we alluded
to earlier if you go down the template
route there's tons of options you can
choose whether you get a simple drag and
drop builder where you might pay a few
pounds or dollars a month like
squarespace or wix or whether you
actually find a theme on something like
wordpress on divi or elementor and you
start tinkering that yourself or get
someone to help you with or if you're
looking at e-commerce you might look at
platforms like shopify or opencart or
woocommerce which is a version of
wordpress there's a lot of platforms out
there but really you need to consider
what do i need to enable users to do on
the front end of the site so my visitors
to my site what do i want them to be
able to do perhaps they want to get a
quick idea of what we do how we help our
pricing and get in touch perhaps
something quite simple and on the back
end what do i actually need to be able
to manage on the admin side that's known
as a cms or a content management system
where you can manage your content make
day-to-day updates understand what you
and your team are going to be needing to
make updates and tweaks to and then
research which cms is going to be the
best platform for you for example
wordpress one of the most
popular platforms on the web in fact i
believe it powers most of the sites that
are online so it's it's very well
supported it's pretty good on seo we
tend to use wordpress for a lot of our
information and lead gen sites just
because it's easy to manage it ranks
pretty well on google a lot of clients
like it but each and every site is
different everyone's got different needs
so do your research understand which
platform is going to be the best fit for
your business needs or on the flip side
to throw a spanner in the works you
could go without a cms so without a
content management system without an
admin side for example at
webchoiceuk.com we built our site what's
called front end code only which is html
css javascript and such basically means
it doesn't have a back end so we can
take an emphasis on speed so the website
loads lightning fast doesn't need to
have an admin site on it so all the
content can load super fast so if you're
working with a web development partner
or you've got web developers in-house or
you're not too bothered about making
updates via the admin side to your site
then perhaps consider going front end
only so you can take a real emphasis on
a real fast loading lightning quick
website just as another option if you're
not too keen on having that admin site
so to summarize templates or themes are
a great fast route to market so if
you're perhaps strapped for cash you're
a new business you want to get something
up and running pretty fast to clearly
kind of show what you do point prospects
to it they can get an idea of how you
help maybe see some of your work and get
in touch templates are a fine route as a
short-term solution but longer term you
probably want to consider a custom
design if you're going to be investing
in marketing and advertising things like
seo
google ads maybe social maybe email
marketing so not only can you build your
website with a custom design that's
going to attract build trust with
qualify educate and convert your idle
prospects into a steady stream of
inbound leads you can also tinker with
the site regularly it's going to be that
long-term solution it's going to load
nice and fast it's going to give you the
flexibility you need to make updates and
really give you a long-term foundation
to grow your business and increase
inbound revenue and there you have it i
hope this summary of template versus
custom design if your website has been
of use if you are listening to the audio
podcast a quick rating would be much
appreciated or if you're on youtube a
quick subscribe i'd be very very
thankful for and with that i should
catch you on the next episode cheers